README.md, before:

# Fast

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/jonatas/fast.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/jonatas/fast)

Fast is a "Find AST" tool to help you search in the code abstract syntax tree.

Ruby allow us to do the same thing in a few ways then it's hard to check
how the code is written.

## Syntax for find in AST

The current version cover the following elements:

- `()` to represent a **node** search
- `{}` is for **any** match
- `$` is for **capture**
- `_` is **something** not nil
- `nil` matches exactly **nil**
- `...` is a **node** with children
- `^` is to get the **parent node** of an expression
- `?` is for **maybe**
- `\1` to use the first **previous captured** element

The syntax is inspired on [RuboCop Node Pattern](https://github.com/bbatsov/rubocop/blob/master/lib/rubocop/node_pattern.rb).

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'ffast'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install ffast

## How it works

The idea is search in abstract tree using a simple expression build with an array:

A simple integer in ruby:

```ruby
1
```

Is represented by:

```ruby
s(:int, 1)
```

Basically `s` represents `Parser::AST::Node` and the node has a `#type` and `#children`.

```ruby
def s(type, *children)
  Parser::AST::Node.new(type, children)
end
```

A local variable assignment:

```ruby
value = 42
```

Can be represented with:

```ruby
ast = s(:lvasgn, :value, s(:int, 42))
```

Now, lets find local variable named `value` with an value `42`:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value (int 42))') # true
```

Lets abstract a bit and allow any integer value using `_` as a shortcut:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value (int _))') # true
```

Lets abstract more and allow float or integer:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value ({float int} _))') # true
```

We can match "a node with children" using `...`:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value ...)') # true
```

You can use `$` to capture a node:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value $...)') # => [s(:int, 42)]
```

Or match any local variable assignment combining both `_` and `...`:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn _ ...)') # true
```

You can also use captures in any levels you want:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn $_ $...)') # [:value, s(:int, 42)]
```

Keep in mind that `_` means something not nil and `...` means a node with
children.

Then, if do you get a method declared:

```ruby
def my_method
  call_other_method
end
```
It will be represented with the following structure:

```ruby
ast =
  s(:def, :my_method,
    s(:args),
    s(:send, nil, :call_other_method))
```

Keep an eye on the node `(args)`.

Then you know you can't use `...` but you can match with `(_)` to match with
such case.

Let's test a few other examples. You can go deeply with the arrays. Let's suppose we have a hardcore call to
`a.b.c.d` and the following AST represents it:

```ruby
ast =
  s(:send,
    s(:send,
      s(:send,
        s(:send, nil, :a),
        :b),
      :c),
    :d)
```

You can search using sub-arrays with **pure values**, or **shortcuts** or
**procs**:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, [:send, [:send, '...'], :d]) # => true
Fast.match?(ast, [:send, [:send, '...'], :c]) # => false
Fast.match?(ast, [:send, [:send, [:send, '...'], :c], :d]) # => true
```

Shortcuts like `...` and `_` are just literals for procs. Then you can use
procs directly too:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, [:send, [ -> (node) { node.type == :send }, [:send, '...'], :c], :d]) # => true
```

And also work with expressions:

```ruby
Fast.match?(
  ast,
  '(send (send (send (send nil $_) $_) $_) $_)'
) # => [:a, :b, :c, :d]
```

If something does not work you can debug with a block:

```ruby
Fast.debug { Fast.match?(s(:int, 1), [:int, 1]) }
```

It will output each comparison to stdout:

```
int == (int 1) # => true
1 == 1 # => true
```

## Use previous captures in search

Imagine you're looking for a method that is just delegating something to
another method, like:

```ruby
def name
  person.name
end
```

This can be represented as the following AST:

```
(def :name
  (args)
  (send
    (send nil :person) :name))
```

Then, let's build a search for methods that calls an attribute with the same
name:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast,'(def $_ ... (send (send nil _) \1))') # => [:name]
```

### Fast.replace

And if I want to refactor a code and use `delegate <attribute>, to: <object>`, try with replace:

```ruby
Fast.replace ast,
  '(def $_ ... (send (send nil $_) \1))',
  -> (node, captures) {
    attribute, object = captures
    replace(
      node.location.expression,
      "delegate :#{attribute}, to: :#{object}"
    )
  }
```

### Replacing file

Now let's imagine we have real files like `sample.rb` with the following code:

```ruby
def good_bye
  message = ["good", "bye"]
  puts message.join(' ')
end
```

And we decide to remove the `message` variable and put it inline with the `puts`.

Basically, we need to find the local variable assignment, store the value in
memory. Remove the assignment expression and use the value where the variable
is being called.

```ruby
assignment = nil
Fast.replace_file('sample.rb', '({ lvasgn lvar } message )',
  -> (node, _) {
    if node.type == :lvasgn
      assignment = node.children.last
      remove(node.location.expression)
    elsif node.type == :lvar
      replace(node.location.expression, assignment.location.expression.source)
    end
  }
)
```

## `fast` in the command line

It will also inject a executable named `fast` and you can use it to search and
find code using the concept:

```
$ fast '(def match?)' lib/fast.rb
```

- Use `-d` or `--debug` for enable debug mode.
- Use `--ast` to output the AST instead of the original code

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

On the console we have a few functions like `s` and `code` to make it easy ;)

$ bin/console

```ruby
code("a = 1") # => s(:lvasgn, s(:int, 1))
```

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/jonatas/fast. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [Contributor Covenant](http://contributor-covenant.org) code of conduct.


## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

Commit message:

Intersect expressions surrounding with `[` and `]`

README.md, after:

# Fast

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/jonatas/fast.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/jonatas/fast)

Fast is a "Find AST" tool to help you search in the code abstract syntax tree.

Ruby allow us to do the same thing in a few ways then it's hard to check
how the code is written.

## Syntax for find in AST

The current version cover the following elements:

- `()` to represent a **node** search
- `{}` is for **any** matches like **union** conditions with **or** operator
- `[]` is for **all** matches like **intersect** conditions with **and** operator
- `$` is for **capture** current expression
- `_` is **something** not nil
- `nil` matches exactly **nil**
- `...` is a **node** with children
- `^` is to get the **parent node** of an expression
- `?` is for **maybe**
- `\1` to use the first **previous captured** element

The syntax is inspired on [RuboCop Node Pattern](https://github.com/bbatsov/rubocop/blob/master/lib/rubocop/node_pattern.rb).

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'ffast'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install ffast

## How it works

The idea is search in abstract tree using a simple expression build with an array:

A simple integer in ruby:

```ruby
1
```

Is represented by:

```ruby
s(:int, 1)
```

Basically `s` represents `Parser::AST::Node` and the node has a `#type` and `#children`.

```ruby
def s(type, *children)
  Parser::AST::Node.new(type, children)
end
```

A local variable assignment:

```ruby
value = 42
```

Can be represented with:

```ruby
ast = s(:lvasgn, :value, s(:int, 42))
```

Now, lets find local variable named `value` with an value `42`:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value (int 42))') # true
```

Lets abstract a bit and allow some integer value using `_` as a shortcut:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value (int _))') # true
```

Lets abstract more and allow float or integer:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value ({float int} _))') # true
```

Or combine multiple assertions using `[]` to join conditions:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value ([!str !hash !array] _))') # true
```

Matches all local variables not string **and** not hash **and** not array.

We can match "a node with children" using `...`:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value ...)') # true
```

You can use `$` to capture a node:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn value $...)') # => [s(:int, 42)]
```

Or match whatever local variable assignment combining both `_` and `...`:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn _ ...)') # true
```

You can also use captures in any levels you want:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, '(lvasgn $_ $...)') # [:value, s(:int, 42)]
```

Keep in mind that `_` means something not nil and `...` means a node with
children.

Then, if do you get a method declared:

```ruby
def my_method
  call_other_method
end
```
It will be represented with the following structure:

```ruby
ast =
  s(:def, :my_method,
    s(:args),
    s(:send, nil, :call_other_method))
```

Keep an eye on the node `(args)`.

Then you know you can't use `...` but you can match with `(_)` to match with
such case.

Let's test a few other examples. You can go deeply with the arrays. Let's suppose we have a hardcore call to
`a.b.c.d` and the following AST represents it:

```ruby
ast =
  s(:send,
    s(:send,
      s(:send,
        s(:send, nil, :a),
        :b),
      :c),
    :d)
```

You can search using sub-arrays with **pure values**, or **shortcuts** or
**procs**:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, [:send, [:send, '...'], :d]) # => true
Fast.match?(ast, [:send, [:send, '...'], :c]) # => false
Fast.match?(ast, [:send, [:send, [:send, '...'], :c], :d]) # => true
```

Shortcuts like `...` and `_` are just literals for procs. Then you can use
procs directly too:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast, [:send, [ -> (node) { node.type == :send }, [:send, '...'], :c], :d]) # => true
```

And also work with expressions:

```ruby
Fast.match?(
  ast,
  '(send (send (send (send nil $_) $_) $_) $_)'
) # => [:a, :b, :c, :d]
```

If something does not work you can debug with a block:

```ruby
Fast.debug { Fast.match?(s(:int, 1), [:int, 1]) }
```

It will output each comparison to stdout:

```
int == (int 1) # => true
1 == 1 # => true
```

## Use previous captures in search

Imagine you're looking for a method that is just delegating something to
another method, like:

```ruby
def name
  person.name
end
```

This can be represented as the following AST:

```
(def :name
  (args)
  (send
    (send nil :person) :name))
```

Then, let's build a search for methods that calls an attribute with the same
name:

```ruby
Fast.match?(ast,'(def $_ ... (send (send nil _) \1))') # => [:name]
```

### Fast.replace

And if I want to refactor a code and use `delegate <attribute>, to: <object>`, try with replace:

```ruby
Fast.replace ast,
  '(def $_ ... (send (send nil $_) \1))',
  -> (node, captures) {
    attribute, object = captures
    replace(
      node.location.expression,
      "delegate :#{attribute}, to: :#{object}"
    )
  }
```

### Replacing file

Now let's imagine we have real files like `sample.rb` with the following code:

```ruby
def good_bye
  message = ["good", "bye"]
  puts message.join(' ')
end
```

And we decide to remove the `message` variable and put it inline with the `puts`.

Basically, we need to find the local variable assignment, store the value in
memory. Remove the assignment expression and use the value where the variable
is being called.

```ruby
assignment = nil
Fast.replace_file('sample.rb', '({ lvasgn lvar } message )',
  -> (node, _) {
    if node.type == :lvasgn
      assignment = node.children.last
      remove(node.location.expression)
    elsif node.type == :lvar
      replace(node.location.expression, assignment.location.expression.source)
    end
  }
)
```

## `fast` in the command line

It will also inject a executable named `fast` and you can use it to search and
find code using the concept:

```
$ fast '(def match?)' lib/fast.rb
```

- Use `-d` or `--debug` for enable debug mode.
- Use `--ast` to output the AST instead of the original code

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

On the console we have a few functions like `s` and `code` to make it easy ;)

$ bin/console

```ruby
code("a = 1") # => s(:lvasgn, s(:int, 1))
```

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/jonatas/fast. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the [Contributor Covenant](http://contributor-covenant.org) code of conduct.


## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
